# Comparison to GNU Radio

Both GNU Radio and LuaRadio are frameworks for flow graph signal processing.
Many of the concepts regarding flow graphs and blocks in LuaRadio imitate or
are inspired by GNU Radio.

However, LuaRadio differs from GNU Radio in many respects:

* [Purpose](#purpose)
* [Footprint](#footprint)
* [License](#license)
* [Extension](#extension)
* [Features](#features)
    * [Type Signatures](#type-signatures)
    * [Sample Rate Propagation](#sample-rate-propagation)
    * [Embeddability](#embeddability)
* [Performance](#performance)
* [Maturity](#maturity)

## Purpose

LuaRadio is more inclined towards scripting and prototyping than GNU Radio, and
emphasizes fast block development.

## Footprint

GNU Radio has a large size footprint. A binary GNU Radio installation weighs in
at over 100 MB. When the installation includes development support, the
[boost](http://www.boost.org/) development headers and numerous other libraries
and tools (gsl, blas, swig, orc, etc.) can add another 100 MB or more.

GNU Radio has a large compilation footprint, in terms of time and dependencies.
GNU Radio framework and module compilation is generally slow. Compiled versions
of GNU Radio modules and applications can also break in complex ways when the
underlying GNU Radio or boost runtimes are updated. These modules and
applications may require routine re-compilation — sometimes in a particular
order — to be linked correctly with the updated libraries and each other.

LuaRadio's total footprint is on the order of 1 MB and its blocks require no
compilation.  LuaRadio has zero dependencies for non-real-time applications,
and may otherwise use [liquid-dsp](https://github.com/jgaeddert/liquid-dsp) or
[VOLK](http://libvolk.org/) for acceleration in real-time applications.
[liquid-dsp](https://github.com/jgaeddert/liquid-dsp) shares LuaRadio's
affinity for minimal dependencies and making software-defined radio more
accessible to embedded Linux platforms.

## License

GNU Radio is licensed GPL v3, a
[copyleft](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Copyleft) license.

LuaRadio is licensed MIT, a more permissive license.

## Extension

GNU Radio blocks are written in C++ and have a lot of boilerplate for building,
Python binding, and testing. Blocks sometimes use an esoteric form of string
templating (e.g.
[`add_XX_impl.cc.t`](https://github.com/gnuradio/gnuradio/blob/v3.7.9.2/gr-blocks/lib/add_XX_impl.cc.t#L53))
to code generate support for multiple data types. For examples of typical GNU
Radio blocks, see the GNU Radio [Out-of-tree Modules
guide](http://gnuradio.org/redmine/projects/gnuradio/wiki/OutOfTreeModules),
[Blocks Coding
Guide](http://gnuradio.org/redmine/projects/gnuradio/wiki/BlocksCodingGuide),
or the source code of one of the third-party modules on
[CGRAN](http://www.cgran.org/).

GNU Radio does not support creating custom first-class data types for
serialization between blocks, but blocks may exchange Protocol Data Units
(PDUs) with [Tagged
Streams](http://gnuradio.org/doc/doxygen/page_tagged_stream_blocks.html), which
demarcate the boundaries of the structured data, or use asynchronous [Message
Passing](http://gnuradio.org/doc/doxygen/page_msg_passing.html), which pass
data out-of-band of flow graph streams.

LuaRadio blocks are written in pure Lua, have substantially less boilerplate,
and require no compilation or bindings. In LuaRadio, the convenience of
scripting applies to both defining flow graphs and developing blocks.  Blocks
can support multiple data types natively, e.g
[`add.lua`](../radio/blocks/signal/add.lua), with LuaRadio's type signature
system. For examples of typical LuaRadio blocks, see the [Creating
Blocks](3.creating-blocks.md) guide.

LuaRadio supports creating custom first-class data types based on fixed-size C
structures or variable-sized Lua objects for serialization between blocks. This
makes it easy and natural to create blocks that produce structured data, e.g.
decoded packets. See the custom types section of [Creating
Blocks](3.creating-blocks.md#custom-types) for examples.

Compare and contrast GNU Radio and LuaRadio blocks in their source trees: [GNU
Radio](https://github.com/gnuradio/gnuradio/tree/master/gr-blocks/lib),
[LuaRadio](../radio/blocks/signal/).

## Features

### Type Signatures

GNU Radio's I/O signature system is limited to matching sizes of types (e.g.
`sizeof(gr_complex)`) in block connections, whereas LuaRadio's type signature
system is more complete and flexible. Types in block connections are matched
explicitly in LuaRadio, and input types can also be specified by a function
predicate.  For example, the [`JSONSink`](0.reference-manual.md#jsonsink) block
can accept any data type that implements `to_json()`.

GNU Radio blocks can each only support one type signature, which pushes the
problem of block type differentiation to the users. GNU Radio has developed a
rich nomenclature for annotating their block names with their type signature,
using suffixes like `_cc` and `_ff`, e.g. `multiply_cc`, `multiply_ff`,
`fir_filter_ccc`, `fir_filter_ccf`, `fir_filter_fff` — scroll through [GNU
Radio Sphinx documentation](http://gnuradio.org/doc/sphinx/) for more examples.

On the other hand, LuaRadio blocks can support multiple type signatures. For
example, the [`MultiplyBlock`](0.reference-manual.md#multiplyblock) and
[`FIRFilterBlock`](0.reference-manual.md#firfilterblock) can accept both
complex-valued and real-valued input/output types, and the framework will
automatically differentiate the correct type signature based on the block's
connections in a flow graph. This helps with code reuse and consolidation, as
well as ease of use in defining flow graphs.

### Sample Rate Propagation

GNU Radio requires users to manually specify the sample rate of every block.
This is alleviated by defining common sample rates in variables that are shared
among blocks, but ultimately is still error prone. Some blocks require
normalized parameters (e.g. angular frequency), which also obligates users to
compute the correct normalization.

LuaRadio automatically propagates sample rates between all blocks.  This
reduces the amount of configuration needed by blocks, and any frequency
parameters that are required can be specified in units of hertz. It also allows
for a suite of convenience blocks that automatically perform sample rate
dependent initialization, e.g.  the
[`LowpassFilterBlock`](0.reference-manual.md#lowpassfilterblock), whose
parameters are just number of taps and a cutoff frequency in hertz.

### Embeddability

LuaRadio's small footprint allows it to be wholly embeddable in applications.
See the [Embedding LuaRadio](4.embedding-luaradio.md) guide for more details
and examples.

## Performance

Generally speaking, LuaRadio performance is on the same order as GNU Radio
performance. In computationally expensive blocks, like filters, LuaRadio has
matching or slightly better performance to GNU Radio. In other cases, LuaRadio
may have 30% to 80% the performance of GNU Radio, but this is typically for
blocks that are already in the very high throughput territory, e.g. hundreds to
thousands of megasamples per second on an Intel i5 CPU. In a few cases,
LuaRadio performance exceeds GNU Radio performance.

While LuaRadio performance is more than adequate for real-time SDR projects,
GNU Radio still performs better than LuaRadio overall. If performance is your
priority, then you should use GNU Radio.

See the [Benchmarks](http://luaradio.io/benchmarks.html) page for empirical
benchmarks on both LuaRadio and GNU Radio across several platforms.

Future infrastructure improvements and additional library acceleration will
help LuaRadio close the performance gap.

## Maturity

GNU Radio has a larger community, more blocks, more hardware support, and a
more mature codebase.

LuaRadio does not have a graphical flow graph editing tool, like the GNU Radio
Companion (GRC).

GNU Radio currently has some more efficient signal processing blocks, like
blocks with integrated decimation and translation, but these can be added to
LuaRadio as needed.
